---
layout: post
tags:
 - life
 - worldview
 - perspectives
 - morality
 - friendship
---

<span class="emphasis-text"> So much for a post every three days</span>, or
whatever my goal was according to my second SNES controllers post. I've been a
bit absent, recently, adapting to my new 2017 schedule and my new 2017 commitments. I'm
making it a priority to get to be earlier and wake up earlier. I usually roll
with my roommate Alec for a couple hours in the morning (we've been training
Gracie Brazilian jiu jitsu together since ~last May). I want to get done with
this by 8:30A. I also want to warm up a bit before I start rolling with him in
the morning. So, I want to wake up at 6A. In order to get 8 hours of sleep I
need to start getting ready for bed by 9:30P.

But, I've been unable to go to bed so early for a few reasons.

1. I'm just not used to going to bed that early.
1. I've been working hard on a few things recently (an inverse scattering
   algorithm and learning to animate with Blender).
1. I like to watch some television shows, news and listen to podcasts
   before I crash out.

Taking all of these things into consideration, I've been getting around 6 hours
of sleep, on average, recently. That's not too bad, but considering that I'm not
accustomed to taking naps I have been pretty tired recently. All of that being
said, I've been busy and tired. So, I haven't had time to write to all of my
die-hard fans. Okay, now to the meat of today's post.

A good (old) friend came to Toronto, recently. He's in finance (wealth
management) and recently he's had a few stresses in his life that incentivized
him to take a little vacation. So, he came up for a weekend to meet a girl he
met in Berlin last year. Since he knows I'm close to Toronto he hit me up on
LinkedIn and we coordinated a meet-up. I'm really glad that he did that and I'm
proud of myself for taking the time to chill with my boy. We went out, we had a
good time running in the 6. But that wasn't my favorite part of getting to see
him.

He and I haven't seen each other for a bit under four years. Since that time
he's been developing his career in finance and I've been hacking away at
academia. We've both working to find a healthy work-life balance and develop a
consistent, reasonable worldview. So, we both took the opportunity of seeing
other to bounce ideas off of one another. He seemed to appreciate some of the
thoughts that have been bouncing around my brain, recently, and he encouraged me
to document some of them here. So, I guess that's what I'm doing. I hope that
you benefit from them and I hope that you can improve my mind by shaping my
ideas with some dialogue. You can contact me using whatever medium you'd prefer.
I don't own a cell phone, but I have an office land line.

I want to address a few concepts that are important to my perspective of the
world.

1. Moral Balance
1. Responsibility
1. Empathy
1. Progressivism

My girlfriend has told me that before she decides to read an article she first
scans the size of the scrollbar. If the scrollbar makes it seems that the
article is very long then she'll skip reading the article. I want to avoid this.
So, I'm going to break my post into four sections. The four sections will
correspond to the four concepts that I listed above.

Launching into these thoughts that I shared with my friend: I've been influenced
by a lot of Dr. Jordan B. Peterson's perspectives on the mind and morality. Dr.
Peterson appeals a lot to the concept of balance when discussing moral issues.
The concept of balance, as it applies to moral issues, boils down to realizing
that there is often an act (making money, working hard, exercising, eating) that
is constructive to human character in particular amounts, in a particular
context, but is destructive to human character either in excess or in absence.

For example, drug abuse is immoral; medical drug administration is moral. It may
sound weird to say that proper use of medical drugs is a 'moral' act. But, I
think when I address the concept of moral responsibility, next, I can make it
pretty clear that such an act should be considered moral. Consider these other
examples.

1. Eating is beneficial to your health; but, both over-eating and
under-eating are detrimental to one's health.
1. Sleep is natural and recommended; but, over-sleeping is sloth and
   under-sleeping is dangerous.
1. Risk-taking is positive, you wouldn't learn to walk otherwise; but taking on
   too much risk is foolish and risking too little is confining.

So, every act must be carried out in its own balance. Correlated with this idea
is the idea that every evil act is just a corruption of a healthy act. An
unhealthy act is just a healthy act that's done too little or too much. Consider
the parasite. The parasite derives life from its host. However, it's to the
parasite's advantage to provide resources for the host, so that the parasite can
flourish while the host continues living. However, the parasite that kills its
host is the parasite that doesn't work within the balance of the relationship;
the parasite doesn't want to be a parasite.

So, it's my belief that people don't commit evil acts because they believe they
are evil acts. The crazy man does not believe that he is crazy. Instead, the
evildoer believes his acts provide more good to himself (which he values more
than the rest of the universe) than evil to the rest of the universe. The greedy
man is trying to provide for either himself or his family. He believes he can be
greedy because everyone else continues to survive while he sucks the life out of
the economy. If he knew he was killing his host by being greedy then he wouldn't
do it.
