---
layout: post
tags:
 - life
 - worldview
 - perspectives
 - morality
 - friendship
---

<span class="emphasis-text">Every single act </span>performed by a person has a
moral value associated with it. Every act is intrinsically linked to every other
act. My choice to cheat on a test is linked to the likelihood of my passing a
technical interview in the future. My choice not to use contraception is linked
to the outcome of my partner becoming pregnant.

The above examples are trivial cases of instances where responsibility is
obviously assigned. But, it's less obvious that your choice to walk with a
stride length of .8 meters (~31.5 inches) instead of 1 meter (~39.4 inches) has
a positive/negative impact on you and the rest of the universe. Or, that your
choice to buy one variety of apple over another has moral implications. That may
sound extreme. But, I think we'd both agree that your choice to eat junk food
instead of healthy food is immoral. Likelier than not, your choice to eat junk
food will impact your health and require you to either get medical intervention
in the future or, should you choose to abstain from seeking medical support,
will result in your premature death. So, there is a right and wrong apple for
you to buy when you go to buy apples. There is a right heart rate, a proper
blinking rate, a right vocabulary.

Now, whether or not you accept this, you may be concerned regarding the import
of my claims. How will you avoid decision paralysis? Well, like I said before,
life is about balance. Despite our desires to do the most good in the world, we
have to realize that many decisions will do both good and bad and most times it is
too difficult/unreasonable to determine the one that will do the most good. So,
harking back to my earlier discourse, we have to have balance, even in this.
How much can you consider the consequence of your actions and still do good
while avoiding becoming consumed by each step you take? The answer to this question
is incredibly personal and I don't claim to have an algorithm that you can
follow to live the best life. That's a part of the human condition. That's what
we're all trying to figure out together. But, I want to avoid the sentiment that
some actions are neither good nor bad. All actions are tainted with goodness and
badness. Everything matters.

Given how I've formulated responsibility I should probably clarify exactly what
"responsibility" is. Quite simply, responsibility is a continuous trait (that
is, it's a spectrum) whose weight determined as follows: the more directly related to
a good/bad outcome are a person's decisions, the more responsible that person
is.  Now, I don't want responsibility to get confused with guilt. Guilt is a
trait applied to a person if their actions are directly related to the
accomplishment of an immoral act. I can be responsible for someone's death even
if I'm not guilty for that person's death (consider the case of a self-defense
shooting). I can be responsible for a little girl's birthday celebration; no one
would say that I am "guilty" of her happiness.

Since every action is tainted by morality and since every action affects every
other successive outcome in the universe then each person shares responsibility
for every evil/good act committed. The workaholic father is responsible for his
son's suicide. The drunk driver is responsible for destroying a family on the
freeway. The father shares in all of the successes of his son.

This may seem to take the value of out responsibility; in a way it does. If
everyone is responsible for everything, then what does responsibility mean?
Well, I think that summary is a bit unfair. It resembles the contemporary notion
that "the system (government) is so screwed that we can't do anything about it".
That's defeatist. I won't argue that this does take responsibility away from the
person most involved in an act. But, responsibility, as it's being considered
here, doesn't lose its value just because it's spread among so many people.

Our legal system allows for a process of ajudicating parties who share
responsibility to a lesser/greater degree in the act of a crime. An accessory to
murder is still guilty of a crime, even if it's not murder. We need this
understanding. People who accomplish a great scientific breakthrough acknowledge
their peers, their instructors, their history, in making that accomplishment
happen. Everyone shares in greatness; everyone shares in evil.

But, these days people tend to fear responsibility. The father doesn't want to
acknowledge his failure in his son's upbringing. The student doesn't want to
admit his failure in his course performance. The cuckold blames his wife, he
doesn't blame himself. It's hard to take responsibility. It's painful to take
responsibility. When someone accomplishes something amazing it's dangerous for
someone else to take claim credit for it. When someone does something terrible
it's dangerous for someone else to claim credit for it. But, almost never is one
person responsible for anything. The gambler, the drug addict, the murderer, the
Nobel laureate, the all-star pitcher, the president of a world power: They all
owe their status to their own actions as well as to the actions of everyone else
around them.

Now, the problem becomes: How responsible is every person in accomplishing some
thing? That's an impossible question to answer. Just like value, the credit that
each person deserves is subjective. But, we can all agree that every thing has
some amount of value; nothing has no value. Similarly, every person is
responsible for everything. We can obsess over how responsible different parties
are for X good thing or Y bad thing happening. But, that's not so important.

Before we figure out just *how much* every person is responsible we need to have
humility and realize that we are responsible. That's a huge hurdle that we need
to overcome as a society before we start to move onto tougher questions like
that. Now, I can't tell anyone what to do. That's not my responsibility. Even
when I become a father it's not my responsibility to generate rules without
justification. I'm trying to reason a system that's superior to the one today.

I find too many people not taking responsibility for their relationships, for
their job, for their government, for their weight, for their happiness. I firmly
believe that each person is most in charge of their attitude and their outcome.
Whether or not you're psychologically oppressed, or financially limited, or
physically abused you still have a choice about how to live your life. The
oppressor, the financial system, the abuser is definitely responsible for their
mistreatment of whoever. But, the "whoever" is also responsible to take whatever
actions necessary to elevate their own status and improve their own character.

Thus concludes my treatise on responsibility. I hope that it's clear and
consistent. 
